Good afternoon.
My name is Patrick Beard,
and I work on the
Objective-C runtime team,
and I work on garbage collection.
And I'm happy to be here today
to tell you about garbage
collection with Objective-C.
So you're here.
You're curious.
Maybe you want to put a toe in the water.
Why use garbage collection?
Garbage collection will
give you faster development.
You'll be able to spend less time
thinking about memory management and
more time thinking about program design.
Memory leaks, gone.
Crashes due to dangling pointers, gone,
hopefully.
And we provide tools that will help you
visualize your program as it's running.
You can also get faster software because
the code you write will be simpler.
Less code hopefully means
faster a lot of the time.
The garbage collector can
also be collecting memory,
finding memory that's garbage that
should be freed in the background.
It runs concurrently with your program.
And it's also sensitive to
whether the user is actually
doing something important.
It can remain out of the
way until the user pauses.
And so perceived performance can go up.
And it's about time.
It's about your time,
saving you time while
you write your code.
It's about execution time.
It's about making your
programs run faster.
And garbage collection has been
around since the 1960s and has
become increasingly popular with the
languages like Java and C# that have
been around for quite a while now.
So isn't it about time you
use garbage collection?
So the structure of the talk today,
I'm going to talk about
some high-level GC concepts.
If you're not familiar with
how garbage collectors work,
I'm going to spend a
little time showing you,
giving you a mental
model for how they work.
Then I'm going to spend some time
talking about what's new in Snow Leopard.
We have some exciting
developments to talk about.
Then I'm going to dive
into the nuts and bolts,
how to use garbage collection.
How you can get the most out of it.
Finally,
I will spend some time on a demo,
one of our-- a couple of our tools,
and show you how to find out what's
happening in a program and understand it,
comprehend it better.
So let's dive into some
garbage collection concepts.
First off, what is a garbage collector?
What to do?
In this talk, I'm going to concentrate on
using a garbage collector for
managing your objects primarily.
We're having a talk tomorrow at 2:00.
Greg Parker is going to talk
about how the garbage collector
can also be used for lower-level
tasks managing raw memory.
But we're going to talk about
objects primarily today.
So another way to think about
garbage collection beyond it
being automatic memory management,
automatic object management,
is what it isn't.
With garbage collection,
you can forget about reference counting.
You can forget about bookkeeping,
a bunch of details that can take a lot of
your time to think about getting right.
It means no dangling pointers.
You can't over-release an object
with garbage collection because
there's no retain release to do.
And on the other hand, no memory leaks.
You can't over-retain an object.
Thank you very much,
or you're very welcome.
So let's talk about the memory model
in any garbage collected program with a
little bit of emphasis on the Macintosh,
Mac OS X.
Memory is divided up
into three main areas.
The first area are your local
variables and your globals.
The local variables live on your stack
and globals are in static data segments.
Second area,
we call the garbage collected heap.
All of your objects go here.
There's no more multiple zones
and specifying a zone when you
allocate Objective-C objects.
And then there's the malloc zone.
Good old malloc-free.
It's still there.
So the first thing a garbage collector
does is it needs to find out what
objects are live in your program.
So the first thing it does is it
scans your stack.
Next thing it does is it goes
through all your global variables,
finds the pointers that
you've stored there.
So as I said, the garbage collected heap,
that's where your objects go.
And there's also a section of that
heap reserved for non-objects,
some of which are scanned and
some of which are not scanned.
So the garbage collector
scans your objects and stops
with the scanned non-objects,
and the unscanned objects
are not looked at.
Malic zone is explicitly ignored
by the garbage collector.
So I want to show you a concrete example.
Say we have a program that
is manipulating work queues.
First thing it does is it
allocates the first element,
stores it on your stack.
The object is allocated is in the heap,
so this represents a pointer
from the stack into the heap.
We allocate another
object and a third object.
So now we have a full
work queue ready to go,
and the function returns,
stores the head of the work
queue in a global variable,
gets rid of the stack reference.
Now the garbage collector runs.
It has scanned your stack
and your global variables,
and it traces all the pointers it finds
until it reaches your data structure,
marks it, leaves it alone.
So now we advance from the head of
the work queue to another element.
We store this new element
in another global variable.
Erase the pointer from the head.
We're going to process that element,
and then the garbage collector kicks in.
Object disappears.
So object management becomes
assignment and erasing of pointers.
That's all you have to do.
So let's bring this now down to
how our collector does its job.
Pardon me for a second.
When we scan the stack,
we look at every word,
every pointer-sized word on the stack.
Now, we don't look at the entire stack.
We look at the live
stack in your program.
Now,
if you have only a single thread running,
that means we look at the
live range of the current,
where that thread
happens to be right now.
When we look through it,
we look at every, as I said, every word,
and we follow the rule,
if it looks like a pointer,
it is a pointer.
We call that conservative stack scanning.
We do that because it's fast.
We also do that because we
don't have any other choice.
The C compiler,
the Objective-C compiler that
we have does not annotate the
stack in any interesting way
that lets us scan more exactly.
It turns out to not be that big
a problem to do that because
stacks come and go all the time.
And we even provide a facility to clear
the stack periodically so stray pointers
don't tend to stay there very long.
Next thing, we scan globals precisely.
That means we look at every one of
the globals you've ever assigned
to that might contain a pointer.
Unlike the stack,
we know exactly which globals contain
pointers to objects at any given time.
We do that by discovering the
globals as you assign to them,
and more on how that
works in a little bit.
We also scan the instance variables
of your objects precisely.
So if you happen to have an integer
size field that looks like a pointer,
we ignore it.
And it's your job to make sure
your objects are always stored
in properly typed variables.
That brings me to the next topic.
So I want to talk about
three concepts today.
These are kinds of references
that you should understand.
The first one, the primary one,
is the strong reference.
Strong references are
Objective-C object pointers.
And they come in various flavors.
Most general type for storing an
object pointer is the ID type.
If you know Objective-C, you know that.
Then we have these other concrete
class name star pointer types.
As long as you store your pointers
in variables of these types,
the garbage collector will be able
to keep track of what you're doing.
So I want to emphasize the way the
garbage collector finds your objects
is by following strong references.
Any object pointer reference from
the stack or a global variable
will lead to an object or through
a chain of object references.
That's how your objects stay connected.
That's how they stay in touch.
That's how they stay alive.
The next topic,
the next kind of reference,
is the weak reference.
As far as I know,
we're the only programming language
out there that actually has language
support for weak references.
You've probably heard of weak references.
Java has support for them.
But as a class,
you have to use a wrapper object
to represent weak references.
The last time I looked,
my knowledge might be behind.
But that was -- Every time
a new release comes out,
I check.
Do they have language support?
We do.
So what is a weak reference?
A weak reference is a way to tell the
compiler and the garbage collector,
"Skip this pointer.
I know what I'm doing.
I don't want this particular
pointer to be traced.
I want this pointer to not hold up
garbage collection of an object."
How do you get one simply by declaring
an instance variable or a global
variable with a weak storage class?
So here's an example,
a simple class that has some interface
that lets you attach an observer to it.
The observer, the observable object,
will only send messages about what
it's doing as long as the observer
is live to the garbage collector.
If the garbage collector finds
observer objects not reachable,
not visible anymore,
then it will clear it out.
So here's what it looks like.
We have a strong
reference to our observer.
We destroy that strong reference.
Garbage collector clears
the weak reference.
So the garbage collector does two things.
It will not follow the pointer,
and if the object is garbage collected,
it will clear the pointer.
And then,
so there are only two states that
you can see the weak reference in.
Either you read it and you
temporarily create a strong reference,
or you read it and you
see a nil reference.
So this can be the basis of
caching and is a very useful
primitive to have available to you.
So the garbage collector
tosses the object,
and the observable object only sees nil.
The next concept is new for Snow Leopard,
and it is called the
associative reference.
Now,
associative references are interesting
in that they allow you to create
effectively what looks like a
strong reference to an object,
but without actually storing a pointer.
So a strong reference is a
sort of conditional reference.
An associative reference
is a conditional reference,
just like a strong reference is,
but there's no storage required.
And this gives you some
interesting capabilities.
For example,
imagine you wanted to associate a
string object with a color object.
With an associative reference,
you can do that.
Any string, whatever,
you don't have any control over
the implementation of the string.
In fact, any object instance whatsoever
can have an arbitrary other
object associated with it.
And what this means is if that
string object is garbage collected,
the color object will be
garbage collected alongside it.
And as long as the
string object is alive,
the color object will remain alive.
So when we destroy the strong
reference to the string,
the whole kit and caboodle disappears.
So how do we find out if our
object has been garbage collected?
You can get an active notification.
Your class, your instance can know that
it's been garbage collected by
implementing a finalized method.
This is very similar to Java.
The one thing we don't
do the same way as Java,
we don't allow you to store
a pointer to yourself.
In a finalized method,
we explicitly disallow
what's called resurrection.
But the purpose of a finalized
method is to release resources,
resources that you have allocated
in some way that are not managed
by the garbage collector.
But it's optional.
You don't have to write one,
and it's avoidable.
Oftentimes,
a resource you might be managing can
be managed better and more simply by
using a wrapper object of some sort,
something that might be in Foundation.
Let's hear some caveats
to do with finalization.
As I said, there's no resurrection.
Finalized methods get called
after weak references are cleared,
so even your finalized methods
will never see weak references.
They're called in an arbitrary order.
You can't guarantee that one object
gets finalized before another.
And they have to be thread-safe,
because we are making it so
that they might be called
On the collector thread,
on the main thread,
or they might be called on the thread
that's currently using an object,
or a thread that's currently
doing a garbage collection.
The final thing is objects can be
messaged after they're finalized
because of that arbitrary ordering.
All the objects in a cluster
of garbage can see each other.
And that can be confusing because
that means you might get called,
some of your methods might
get called when you've already
finalized some of the state.
That calls for some
defensive programming,
to say the least.
Now, write barriers are something that
garbage collectors-- that our garbage
collector uses as a foundation for
implementing a number of useful features.
Weak references, for example,
are built upon the concept
of a write barrier.
We have two kinds of write barriers:
strong write barriers
and weak write barriers.
What we are able to build on top of
the concept of a write barrier are the
various garbage collection algorithms.
So let me step back and say
what is a write barrier?
A write barrier is how we do all
assignment of object pointers in
the language when you assign to
an instance variable or a global
variable or an indirect pointer,
we will issue a write barrier.
We don't issue a write barrier
when you write to the stack.
stack writes are very common,
so that's a good optimization.
But this affords us a lot of
flexibility by effectively
virtualizing the assignment operator
whenever it's used on your objects.
This allows us to do at least three kinds
of garbage collection algorithms that we
are working on and have had for a while.
Generational GC, there's something called
the generational hypothesis.
That's an assumption that objects
mostly are created for temporary use,
and they die very soon
after they're created.
That's a great example of
that is event objects when
you're doing event processing.
The other important thing to
know about generational garbage
collection is that objects are aged,
and as they get older,
we look at them less often.
The write barrier gives us a
convenient way to track whether or
not objects should be looked at.
Another algorithm is a
concurrent GC algorithm,
as I said.
We run the garbage collector in another
thread independently of your code,
so your code, your program will run
with many fewer pauses.
The cost for that, though,
is paid for by using the write barrier.
It gives us a way to sort of
incrementally find out what
your program is doing behind
the garbage collector's back.
The write barrier also lets us do
an exciting new technique where we
track whether or not objects are
known only by a single thread or not.
So we call that the
thread local collector,
and I'll be discussing
that in a few minutes.
So to bring this down to concrete terms,
a write barrier.
The strong write barrier, as an example,
if you have an instance variable,
whenever it gets written
to using a setter method,
the compiler generates a call to
the Objective-C runtime system.
So we get a call to obc assign
Ivar for instance variables.
weak references go through a
different kind of write barrier.
We have the weak write barrier.
And we also, in this particular case,
have a read barrier.
This is how the runtime system
guarantees that when you are
reading a weak reference,
that all you get back is either
a valid strong reference or nil.
This is a synchronization point
with the garbage collector.
All right, let's talk about what's
new for Snow Leopard.
The first topic is how we're
making your software more robust.
The second two topics have to
do with improved performance.
So as I stated earlier,
global variables are tracked precisely.
We discover the global variables as they
go through the global write barrier.
We add them to a list of roots of globals
that should be scanned from then on.
And it works really great,
except when it doesn't.
In Leopard,
We realized that if you pass
the address of a global variable
down a function call chain,
our indirect write bearer had no
knowledge of the fact that it was
a pointer to a global variable.
So we could miss writes to
global variables through
that sort of a call path.
So here's an example of
a workaround for that.
Don't ever pass a global to-- address
to a global variable and you'll be fine.
Use a local variable or
an instance variable,
either one will work,
and then assign it back to the
global variable when you're done.
So under Snow Leopard, we've fixed this,
and we've added even the
ability to know-- we've added
to the indirect write barrier,
essentially,
the ability to know if an address
you're writing to is in some global
data segment of some library or bundle
that maybe has been dynamically loaded.
And that also gives us the ability
to have a goodbye kiss to the
collector if a bundle gets unloaded.
So then we won't have
any stray references,
global references being scanned.
So in Snow Leopard,
you'll be able to write code like this,
where you simply pass the
pointer to the global variable.
But if you want your
code to continue to run,
write it the other way,
because then if you want it to run
under both Snow Leopard and Leopard.
Plus, that way is actually
slightly more efficient,
because we don't have
to classify the pointer.
All right, that was a bug fix.
Now this is a new feature.
So faster allocation.
We studied running Objective-C programs,
Cocoa programs,
and realized that there's a really big
premium on the performance of allocating
lots and lots of small objects.
Most objects are between 16 and
48 bytes in a 32-bit program.
So if you can make those
objects really fast to allocate,
programs speed up very, very measurably.
So we did this by creating a cache
that hangs off of thread local storage
and putting the most common sizes in
there and periodically refilling it.
But it turns out that was not enough to
speed up garbage collection because in
a sense what we'd be doing is making the
garbage collector's job harder by giving
threads access to objects even faster.
And we already had some problems
in keeping up and having the
collector reclaim objects as
fast as they were being consumed.
So that problem was made worse by if
we only performed this optimization.
But an optimization like this
was also added to malloc.
And as you can see, in Snow Leopard,
malloc runs six times faster as a result.
But it's not enough of an optimization
for the garbage collector.
Malik's in a different position.
It's able to allocate an object
off of the thread local cache,
and then when someone's
done with the object,
put it right back on
a thread local cache.
In our system, the garbage collector is
running on another thread.
It doesn't have access to other threads,
thread local caches.
So we only get half the optimization.
So this gave us an idea.
What if we could have our garbage
collector run on every thread,
potentially?
And what if we could have objects --
what if we could find out whether objects
are known by only one thread or not?
The auto-release pool in
reference-counted non-GC code
works as well as it does because
most objects come into existence,
are used temporarily,
and then they are auto-released
all on the same thread.
This gave us the idea of having what
we call the thread local collector.
As I said, the generational hypothesis is
that most objects die young.
With the thread local hypothesis,
we gained the intuition
that most objects stay,
live and die their entire
existence on a single thread.
This gives us an opportunity to run
a much simpler garbage collector.
That simply examines the
current thread stack and all
the objects reachable from it.
And if we could keep track of which
objects were just local to that stack,
that collector would only have
to consider that set of objects.
And the write barrier, again,
comes in and saves us and provides
us a way to actually determine,
has this object remained local or not?
So the write barrier can actually trap a
store into a global object and reclassify
an object from local to global.
We call that an escape.
So Leopard works really well.
It comes and picks up your garbage.
It's kind of slow.
With Snow Leopard,
performance is going to go way up.
And here's a preliminary graph of
what kind of performance we've been
seeing on some specialized benchmarks.
We call this the recycling rate.
This is the rate at which an object
can be allocated and then reclaimed.
And some of our measurements indicate
that we can get objects in and out of
the thread local cache a factor of 30
times faster than we were doing before.
This is going to be huge.
So if you've--
Thank you.
And thank you to Blaine Garst and
Josh Benke for working so hard on it.
If you had the excuse of performance,
"Ah, garbage collection is too slow,"
we hope to prove you wrong and
hope you'll prove us right.
So now let's get into some nuts
and bolts using garbage collection.
If you haven't done it before,
this is how you do it.
You turn it on,
you opt in to garbage collection,
you go into Xcode,
you make a new project,
and if you're just writing
an app from scratch,
just turn it on.
Type in "garbage collection" in
the search box in the Preferences
Project Inspector and choose
"Required." Required is the
recommended choice for applications.
Supported allows you to write a
framework that can actually run
in either garbage collected mode
or non-garbage collected mode.
In my demo, I'm going to show you an
example of such a framework.
So here's the hello world of
garbage collecting programs.
If you've turned everything on correctly,
one checkbox.
Then this program will print "Hello,
Garbage Collector" because
the NSGarbageCollector class
is the Foundation interface
to the garbage collector,
returns nil if the garbage
collector mode is not turned on.
So now I'm going to talk about
a few design patterns that
garbage collection influences,
garbage collection affects.
First one is the venerable
accessor method pattern.
Set get methods.
Everybody does them.
Nobody likes them.
But they are a fact of life.
When you write one using retain-release,
you have to follow something that
looks roughly like this pattern.
This is the recommended
pattern we all follow.
You have to make sure that when you
are changing a value that the value is,
in fact, a new value,
then it's safe to call release on the
old value and call retain on the new.
The getter method uses
the auto-release pattern,
retain auto-release.
That guarantees that the object
will stay live with respect to the
current thread's auto-release pool.
When you write it in garbage collection,
if you've written any Java code,
this is how you write it in Java.
Just get set.
All that ownership,
transfer of ownership logic that we
had to do before is now nicely tucked
away in the runtime system behind
being done by the write barriers.
Now for extra credit,
not so much extra credit these days with
so many cores around and needing to write
lots and lots of threads in our programs.
To write your accessor
methods thread safe,
you've got to use some
sort of critical section.
Wrap the code that we did
before in the critical section.
Same basic idea,
but now this is the thread-safe version.
Well, guess what?
Under Garbage Collection, you're done.
Another thing that is very
problematic in reference-counted code,
retain-release, is the cycle.
The cycle is a bugaboo.
You can't handle cycles cleanly
in reference-counted code.
This is why our frameworks take such
great pains to use what are called
non-retained references and to advertise.
You have to read the doc.
You have to know,
"When I put this object there,
I better worry about taking
it out when I'm done."
So why?
Because here's an example of a cycle.
We have a pointer that's pointing
to one of the elements of the cycle
of this circularly linked list.
And that object has
retained count of two.
We get rid of it.
Its retained count goes to one.
Now the whole thing is a leak.
Under garbage collection,
objects have a retain count,
but garbage collected objects,
the retain count is zero.
We have this retain count as a
backward compatible way of interacting
with core Foundation objects,
but Cocoa objects don't use it.
They don't even allocate any space
for it other than a couple of bits.
However, you can use that retain
count if you need to.
You can call cf.retain on a Cocoa object.
You do that if you're going
to store that pointer.
Remember I said the garbage collector
doesn't look in the malloc zone.
But if you have some malloc data
structures and you just need to put
that object there and hold on to it,
you can call cf.retain on it.
When you get rid of that, though,
that object's retain
count will go to zero,
and garbage collector
tosses everything in mass.
No problem.
Okay, the next thing I want to
talk about is nib loading.
So nibs are these files.
They contain user interfaces.
We all know them.
We all love them.
They work a little bit differently
under garbage collected code.
So here's a nib that has
one top-level object in it.
It's a HUD panel.
Under retain release,
I have a simple program
that has a button,
test.
When you click that button,
the window pops up.
It just loaded that nib.
Do it again, another one comes up.
Third time.
We get three and we see that
really nice alpha blended effect.
Ooh.
OK.
Under Garbage Collection,
run the same program.
We recompiled it.
Wait a second, where did that window go?
Do it again, third time,
The window comes up and it goes away.
Window comes up, it goes away.
What's happening?
Under garbage, under retain release code,
top level objects by default leak.
They come up,
they have a retain count of one,
nobody's holding onto them.
They stay around.
Under GC, they go away.
So if you're creating objects whose
sole side effect is to set something up,
set some preferences, do whatever,
And they would leak by default
in reference-counted code.
The GC collects them.
So you have to be aware of that,
but mostly just worry about
connecting your objects with outlets.
I had one particular case
where I needed to create some
objects that wrap some streams,
and the only way I could keep
them live was by storing my object
self into a global variable.
I had to do that under
GC to keep it rooted.
Another application
of garbage collection,
now this gets back into
the weak references system,
is called weak caching.
So say we have an application that
deals in lots and lots of images.
It could be a screen saver bouncing
images around and it's displaying
them at various scale sizes or
something where the performance of
rendering each frame is critical.
So we don't want to let the
graphic system scale the images,
we want to pre-scale the images.
So we have a set of scaled images that
get created one by one and held onto.
But eventually,
if we run through lots and lots of scale
sizes with lots and lots of images,
we might run out of memory.
How do we get rid of them?
How do we know to get rid of them?
Well, the weak reference system can
give us a handy way to do that.
Here's a class called an Image Scaler,
and it has two instance variables,
an image that we want to get
various scaled copies of,
And a map table that
will act as our cache.
So it's real simple.
We create one with an image,
and we call the scaled image
method specifying a size,
an NS size.
So this method creates the map
table using a special method,
Map Table with Strong to Weak Objects.
Now,
in case maybe you're not aware of this,
but NSMapTable used to be a
C-based API from the olden days.
And in Leopard, we enhanced it.
We gave it a lot more power.
We turned it into an
object for one thing.
We also made it a sort of
dictionary Swiss Army knife.
You can configure these
things in so many ways,
I don't even understand
all the combinations.
But this one is particularly useful.
Strong to Weak Objects.
The strong refers to the keys
that we're going to use in the
dictionary and the map table.
And weak refers to the values
that we want to hold onto,
in this case, the scaled images.
So when the scaled
image method is called,
we take that size that was
specified that we're asking for,
we wrap it in an NS value,
and that will be our key.
We then check to see if the
cache contains that copy of it.
If not, then we make a new copy,
we scale that image,
and store it in our cache.
Now, what's great about this,
for as many clients as happen
to be using this image,
this scaled image, at the same time,
think threads or multiple calls to it,
These images, these scaled copies,
will all be shared,
and then when all the threads
that are done with those images
go away and release those images,
that copy will go away.
So the cache does this for us for free.
So let's talk about finalization
a little bit more in depth now.
Finalization is something
[Transcript missing]
For all the reasons I said before,
the caveats that were stated,
it's tricky.
You've got to make sure your
finalizers are thread safe.
So it's a better idea
to look at your objects,
design your classes with states in mind,
the allowed states that the
object should go through.
So think of it as a state machine.
When an object is done,
prefer an explicit shutdown.
A great example of this is a
file or a network connection,
something that is holding onto
resources that are fairly costly.
You should just design
that right into your API.
So finalization is there
primarily as a backstop.
One very great advantage of a
garbage collected system over
a non-garbage collected system
is in the face of exceptions.
We don't have fancy stack
destructors where objects will be
torn down as the stack unwinds.
We do have an exception system
that is compatible with that.
We actually don't need it under
garbage collected code because
the finalizers of the objects that
might have been allocated along
the way while you were throwing--
before you threw the exception,
will get invoked.
So the finalizers are
there to sort of clean up,
make sure things aren't left dangling,
resources are not clogging up the system.
That's a great use of a finalizer.
So, concrete example,
some sort of simulation.
You've got an object
that goes into a mode.
It is running its engine.
Maybe it's doing a physics simulation
or it's doing an animation.
Maybe there's a thread
or a timer behind it.
Make sure that that object has an
API to tear it down gracefully.
Please don't leave the motor running.
So how do I get rid of a finalize?
Here's a case where we have a class that
holds onto a buffer that's been malloc'd.
And in this case,
it's technically correct.
We need a finalize method.
If we don't have one, that buffer,
it's going to leak.
But we can change this.
There's a Foundation alternative to it.
It's called NSMutableData.
The NSMutableData actually is
even better than a malloc-free
because it's a resizable buffer,
a resizable block of memory.
This is all very simple stuff.
But if you just simply switch
from that to the other,
your finalized method goes to nothing.
In fact, you don't even need one.
There are a number of systems,
subsystems in Cocoa and
things you can use.
And this is just a
short list of examples.
These are the kinds of things that
really require you to disconnect them.
You can't just simply, in most cases,
leave them to the garbage
collector to clean up.
You bring up a window.
Well, except for that case
I showed you with the nibs,
panels will disappear if
they're garbage collected.
But windows do not.
Windows are more special.
They get attached to the user
interface of your program.
So the user will close a window.
That's a very active operation.
Timers, on the other hand, well,
they're not visible.
Timers have to be torn down,
just like in reference-counted code.
So these are the kinds of things that
you will still have to think about.
Garbage collection is a very
important part of your design.
Garbage collection won't solve
all these problems for you.
Key value observation is another one.
If you happen to create
an observer on an object,
don't let the object that's being
observed garbage collect while the
key value observation is in force.
Most of the time you're not
going to have to think about
this if you're using bindings.
The binding system takes care of it.
The last one is the notification center.
The notification center
uses weak references.
So, you don't have to write a finalized
method if what you--all you need to
do is unregister your object from,
uh, the notification center.
However,
you do want to make sure you don't
leave your object in a bad state and
still attach to the notification center.
So, there's a case where maybe as part
of your object's explicit shutdown,
you should take it out of
the notification center.
But you don't have to.
It will be removed for you.
I don't know if you've
seen this little guy.
That's the logo for the mascot of GDB.
Fish, I can't remember the name of it,
it's a kind of fish that lives
in shallow water and squirts
and eats low-hanging bugs.
Just thought that was interesting.
We've added support to GDB for
doing real low-level tasks having
to do with garbage collection.
So one of the facilities is you can now,
within GDB, if a program has crashed,
usually that's why you're in GDB,
you can look at the total history
of an object's allocation.
That is, all of the stack logs,
all the stack crawls of an object,
when it was allocated and deallocated.
This facility is invaluable when
debugging garbage collection problems.
If you forgot to create
a strong reference,
you used a void star to hold onto a
pointer to a garbage collected object,
and it goes away,
you can use this facility to
find out who last allocated it
and when did it get deallocated.
Another facility is you want to know,
well, why is this object still here?
It should be gone.
You can ask GDB,
there's a command to ask it,
what are all the objects currently
referencing this object directly?
And there's also a way to find out
what global variables and along what
path is my object being referenced?
We call that root tracing.
So that's in GDB.
The next tool we provide,
the next level up the chain,
a hierarchy of high levelness,
is the GC instrument in the Instruments
program you've probably heard about.
The GC instrument is a sort of a
version of the object alloc tool with
Knowledge, customized knowledge for
the garbage collector.
It can also show you
the same information.
It can show you
What objects are referencing your
objects' direct chains look like,
and you can look at--
peruse the stack histories.
It's a good tool to try to
understand your program.
And furthermore, it can actually show you
What are all the objects
currently in your program?
You can search for them by type,
search for them by pointer.
So it's a great visualization tool,
and I'm going to be demonstrating
that in a few minutes.
Finally, there's this cool little open
source tool called Fscript.
And it is really handy to look at
your program while it's running,
interact with it,
and sort of do what-if type queries.
You know, like, well,
what if I got rid of
this pointer right here,
right now?
What would happen?
So that's a nifty little tool.
It's now garbage collection compatible,
and it's packaged as a framework.
And it is a framework that
works in both GC and non-GC.
So it's a good example of that if
you're interested in doing that.
So let's give this a whirl.
So I have instruments set up right
now to run a demo application.
One of the things we can do is
pause it and take a look at--
How big our heap size is,
how many objects are around in
terms of overall memory size,
And the top bar in this upper
display is the amount of virtual
memory set aside for the program,
whereas the other, the tiny one,
is how much is actually in use.
It's a tiny little program.
Unpause.
So this is a tiny little application.
It's very similar to the nib
loader that I showed you before.
It has two buttons,
one that creates a panel,
one that creates a window.
The keep checkbox says,
should we hold a reference to
the object after we allocate it?
So if I make one,
Move it around, make another one.
First one, garbage collects.
Goes away.
Do it again just to prove
that it wasn't a fluke.
Second one goes away.
Uncheck the checkbox.
Goes away.
Great.
That's all that's going to plan.
Now, we create an NSWindow.
Create another Ennis window.
Another Ennis window.
None of the objects
are garbage collecting.
What's going on?
Oh, I know.
It's my checkbox.
Let me uncheck it.
Go away, please.
Go away, go away, go away, go away.
They're not going away.
Why aren't they going away?
So let me simplify it.
Well, I happen to know that--
let me get rid of that one,
make another one.
To show that this object is actually
still referenced by my program,
I want to pop up an F script window.
In F script window, I have this object C,
which is my controller.
And its window field right now is null,
and yet the object's
still staying around.
A window, not a HUD.
There.
Now look at it again.
All right.
So this object is the thing
that's holding on to my window.
F script lets me look into that.
I could do C window.
I could do C set window.
No.
Still, the object's not going away.
All right, I know it was this address,
so let's pop into instruments
and see what's going on.
First thing I have to
do is take a snapshot.
You can set it to periodically snapshot.
I'm just having it snapshot
on demand right now.
Now, I can have it show me all the
objects in the heap currently,
lots and lots of strings.
And I can paste in
Copy.
Paste in the pointer.
All right.
There's the NSWindow.
So we have this block list.
We have this one object
that's found in it.
There's a detail view over
here that gives me some
information about the object.
Here is the stack crawl of
when the object was allocated.
Makes sense.
I recognize that code.
That's my code.
PCB controller, blah, blah, blah.
The other thing it can tell us over here
is what's holding on to this window.
Huh, it's telling me that the
NSApplication object is somehow
holding on to the window.
I can pop back up to
F script and say NSApp.
In fact, there are two windows,
but I don't really know
which window is which,
so I want to figure that out.
So I can ask it using this handy send a
message to all the elements of an array.
That's really handy.
I wish GDB had that.
This basically lets me easily
positionally identify the
windows that I'm interested in.
So what the heck?
Why is the application
still holding on to it?
I happen to know that the
NS app is supposed to only have
weak references to windows.
So why is it staying around?
Well, we can dive into this object
if we go back to instruments,
and it can tell us
Exactly how the object is connected.
This display over here gives me a path.
From the NS application object
all the way to the NS window.
So it tells me, oh,
it's connected to the window menu.
There it is.
Bring it back up.
So it's still alive because of that.
If I close the window, it disappears.
Windows take care of their own lifetime.
So Instruments was able to tell me it's
basically communicating with my process.
It's able to enumerate all
of the objects in the system,
and it's able to find out how
they're connected together.
All right.
Demo, demo.
So we have one more session where
we're going to be talking about
advanced topics in garbage collection.
If you're interested in learning
more and more about that,
we talk about how core
Foundation interacts,
how to do dual-mode frameworks,
and porting.
Maybe you want to port
a large body of code.
And then some more about some
of the lower-level tool support.
So in summary,
Garbage collection is like having
your own personal accountant.
He's there at your side.
He's doing your bookkeeping.
He's balancing your checkbook.
He's making sure you deliver
your project on time.
You don't have to worry
about bookkeeping.
It's also checking to make sure
the amount of memory you're
using is staying under control,
so you're going to be under budget.
And finally, in Snow Leopard,
with a thread local collector,
you have effectively a team of
accountants all working on your
behalf and at your service.
There's another session tomorrow,
as I said.
Greg Parker's going to be giving a talk,
and we already had a session yesterday.
Thank you very much.